lessons 3/4: parsing and disambiguation (#1847)
kframework/k: k-distribution/k-tutorial/1_basic/03_parsing/README.md

execute that program: because it represented a term of sort `Color` that was
parsed and interpreted by K's interpreter. In other words, `krun` parses and
interprets terms according to the grammar defined by the developer. It is
automatically converted into an AST of that term, and then the `colorOf`
function is evaluated using the function rules provided in the definition.

Bringing us back to the file `lesson-03-a.k`, we can see that this grammar
has given a simple BNF grammar for expressions over booleans. We have defined
constructors corresponding to the boolean values true and false, and functions
corresponding to the boolean operators for and, or, not, and xor. We have also
given a syntax for each of these functions based on their syntax in the `C`
programming language. As such, we can now write programs in the simple language
we have defined.

Input the following program into your editor as `and.bool` in the same
directory:

```
true && false
```

We cannot interpret this program yet, because we have not given rules defining
the meaning of the `&&` function yet, but we can parse it. To do this, you can

> run (from the same  directory):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
run (from the same directory):
```

```
kast --output kore and.bool
```

`kast` is K's just-in-time parser. It will generate a grammar from your K
definition on the fly and use it to parse the program passed on the command
line. The `--output` flag controls how the resulting AST is represented; don't
worry about the possible values yet, just use `kore`.

You ought to get the following AST printed on standard output, minus the
formatting:

```
inj{SortBoolean{}, SortKItem{}}(
  Lbl'UndsAnd-And-UndsUnds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean{}(
    Lbltrue'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}(),
    Lblfalse'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}()
  )
)
```

Don't worry about what exactly this means yet, just understand that it
represents the AST of the program that you just parsed. You ought to be able
to recognize the basic shape of it by seeing the words `true`, `false`, and
`And` in there. This is **Kore**, the intermediate representation of K, and we

> will cover it in detail later.

Reviewer: I think you should have them do `--output kast` as well, and have them compare the Kore and the KAST, make sure they can map the `_&&__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean` symbol to the munged version. You could just say "Now try `--output kast` and see how they compare" here as something they can try.

Reviewer: Just giving them something to do like this will force them to actually read the output.

## Ambiguities

Now let's try a slightly more advanced example. Input the following program
into your editor as `and-or.bool`:

```
true && false || false
```

> When you try and parse this program, you ought to see the following error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try parsing this program (`kast and-or.bool`), you ought to see the following error:
```

quite simply.

Consider the following modified definition, which we will save to
`lesson-03-d.k`:

```k
module LESSON-03-D

  syntax Boolean ::= "true" | "false"
                   | "(" Boolean ")" [bracket]
                   | "!" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "&&" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "^" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "||" Boolean [function]

endmodule
```

In this definition, if the user does not explicitly define parentheses, the
grammar remains ambiguous and K's just-in-time parser will report an error.
However, you are now able to parse more complex programs by means of explicitly
grouping subterms with the bracket we have just defined.

Consider `and-or-left.bool`:

```
(true && false) || false
```

Now consider `and-or-right.bool`:

```
true && (false || false)
```

If you parse these programs with `kast`, you will once again get a single
unique AST with no error. If you look, you might notice that the bracket itself
does not appear in the AST. In fact, this is a property unique to brackets:
productions with the bracket attribute are not represented in the parsed AST

> of a term, and the child of the bracket is folded immediately into the parent
> term. This is the reason for the requirement that a bracket production have
> a single non-terminal of the same sort as the production itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a term, and the child of the bracket is folded immediately into the parent
term. This is the reason for the requirement that a bracket production have
a single non-terminal of the same sort as the production itself.

Confirm using `kast` that indeed, the bracket production defined above does
not appear in the resulting output kore on these two examples.
```

Author: This is redundant; we already talk about using kast and noticing that the bracket doesn't appear in the resulting AST.

Reviewer: We talk about it, but this is about giving the user an exercise (so you could put the `### Exercise` block here). I think many people learn better if they are given little tasks to confirm their understanding, so that they have to figure out "what do I need to type in the terminal to confirm that the brackets do not show up?" and "how do I read the output and make sure that the bracket does not show up?"

Reviewer: Ah I see you gave exactly this exercise below. Sounds good!

have to repeatedly parse strings with the same parser. For this reason, it is
generally encouraged that when parsing programs, you use K's ahead-of-time
parser generation. K makes use of
[GNU Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/) to generate parsers.

By default, you can enable ahead-of-time parsing via the `--gen-bison-parser`
flag to `kompile`. This will make use of Bison's LR(1) parser generator. As
such, if your grammar is not LR(1), it may not parse exactly the same as if
you were to use the just-in-time parser, because Bison will automatically pick
one of the possible branches whenever it encounters a shift-reduce or
reduce-reduce conflict. In this case, you can either modify your grammar to be
LR(1), or you can enable use of Bison's GLR support by instead passing 
`--gen-glr-bison-parser` to `kompile`. Note that if your grammar is ambiguous,
the ahead-of-time parser will not provide you with particularly readable error
messages at this time.

If you have a K definition named `foo.k`, and it generates a directory when
you run `kompile` called `foo-kompiled`, you can invoke the ahead-of-time
parser you generated by running `foo-kompiled/parser_PGM <file>` on a file.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Time the difference in parse time for the program `and-or.bool` above using K's
just-in-time parser (`time kast and-or.bool --output kore`), and the
ahead-of-time parser (`time lesson-03-kompiled/parser_PGM and-or.bool`).
Note that the ahead-of-time parser can _only_ output kore, so no need for the
`--output kore` flag.
```

formatting:

```
inj{SortBoolean{}, SortKItem{}}(
  Lbl'UndsAnd-And-UndsUnds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean{}(
    Lbltrue'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}(),
    Lblfalse'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}()
  )
)
```

Don't worry about what exactly this means yet, just understand that it
represents the AST of the program that you just parsed. You ought to be able
to recognize the basic shape of it by seeing the words `true`, `false`, and
`And` in there. This is **Kore**, the intermediate representation of K, and we
will cover it in detail later.

Note that you can also tell `kast` to print the AST in other formats. For a
more direct representation of the original K, while still maintaining the
structure of an AST, you can say `kast --output kast and.bool`. This will
yield the following output:

```
`_&&__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean`(
  `true_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList),
  `false_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList)
)
```

Note how the first output is largely a name-mangled version of the second
output. The one difference is the presence of the `inj` symbol in the KORE
output. We will talk more about this in later lessons.

### Exercise

> Parse the expression `false || true` with `--output kastr`. See if you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parse the expression `false || true` with `--output kast`. See if you can
```

```k
module LESSON-03-B
  syntax Color ::= Yellow() | Blue()
  syntax Fruit ::= Banana() | Blueberry()
  syntax Color ::= colorOf(Fruit) [function]
endmodule
```

It turns out that this is equivalent to the following definition which defines
the same grammar, but using BNF notation:

```k
module LESSON-03-C
  syntax Color ::= "Yellow" "(" ")" | "Blue" "(" ")"
  syntax Fruit ::= "Banana" "(" ")" | "Blueberrry" "(" ")"
  syntax Color ::= "colorOf" "(" Fruit ")" [function]
endmodule
```

In this example, the sorts of the argument to the function are unchanged, but
everything else has been wrapped in double quotation marks. This is because
in BNF notation, we distinguish between two types of **production items**:
**terminals** and **non-terminals**. A terminal represents simply a literal
string of characters that is verbatim part of the syntax of that production.
A non-terminal, conversely, represents a sort name, where the syntax of that
production accepts any valid term of that sort at that position.

This is why, when we wrote the program `colorOf(Banana())`, `krun` was able to
execute that program: because it represented a term of sort `Color` that was

> parsed and interpreted by K's interpreter. Seen this way, you can see how that
> string represents a sentence in the formal language defined by the above
> grammar. K then parses it automatically into an AST of that term, and then,
> since the symbol `colorOf` is a function, it evaluates that function using
> the rules that define it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parsed and interpreted by K's interpreter. K parses this string into an AST of the term, then evaluates the `colorOf` function using the functional rules provided in the definition.
```

directory:

```
true && false
```

We cannot interpret this program yet, because we have not given rules defining
the meaning of the `&&` function yet, but we can parse it. To do this, you can
run (from the same  directory):

```
kast --output kore and.bool
```

`kast` is K's just-in-time parser. It will generate a grammar from your K
definition on the fly and use it to parse the program passed on the command
line. The `--output` flag controls how the resulting AST is represented; don't
worry about the possible values yet, just use `kore`.

You ought to get the following AST printed on standard output, minus the
formatting:

```
inj{SortBoolean{}, SortKItem{}}(
  Lbl'UndsAnd-And-UndsUnds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean'Unds'Boolean{}(
    Lbltrue'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}(),
    Lblfalse'Unds'LESSON-03-A'Unds'Boolean{}()
  )
)
```

Don't worry about what exactly this means yet, just understand that it
represents the AST of the program that you just parsed. You ought to be able
to recognize the basic shape of it by seeing the words `true`, `false`, and
`And` in there. This is `KORE`, the intermediate representation of K, and we

> will cover it in detail later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`And` in there. This is **Kore**, the intermediate representation of K, and we
will cover it in detail later.
```

Reviewer: You may also want to consider showing `--output kast` here, because later in the lesson the parsing ambiguities are given in Kast form.

1: syntax Boolean ::= Boolean "||" Boolean [function]

`_||__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean`(`_&&__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean`(`true_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList),`false_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList)),`false_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList))
2: syntax Boolean ::= Boolean "&&" Boolean [function]

`_&&__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean`(`true_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList),`_||__LESSON-03-A_Boolean_Boolean_Boolean`(`false_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList),`false_LESSON-03-A_Boolean`(.KList)))
        Source(./and-or.bool)
        Location(1,1,1,23)
```

Essentially what this error is saying is, `kast` was unable to parse this
program because it is ambiguous. K's just-in-time parser is what is technically
known as a GLL parser, which in practice means it handles the full generality
of context-free grammars, including those grammars which are ambiguous. An
ambiguous grammar is one where one or more sentences in the grammar might be
able to be parsed into more than one distinct AST. In this example, it can't
decide whether it should be parsed as `(true && false) || false` or as
`true && (false || false)`. As a result, it reports the error to the user.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error is saying that `kast` was unable to parse this
program because it is ambiguous. K's just-in-time parser is a GLL parser, which means it can handle the full generality
of context-free grammars, including grammars which are ambiguous. An
ambiguous grammar is one where the same string (program) can be validly parsed as multiple distinct ASTs. In this example, it can't
decide whether it should be parsed as `(true && false) || false` or as
`true && (false || false)`. As a result, it reports the error to the user.

```

being said, the most common type of bracket is one in which a non-terminal
is surrounded by terminals representing some type of bracket such as
`()`, `[]`, `{}`, `<>`, etc. For example, we can define the most common
type of bracket, the type used by the vast majority of programming languages,
quite simply.

Consider the following modified definition, which we will save to
`lesson-03-d.k`:

```k
module LESSON-03-D

  syntax Boolean ::= "true" | "false"
                   | "(" Boolean ")" [bracket]
                   | "!" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "&&" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "^" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "||" Boolean [function]

endmodule
```

In this definition, if the user does not explicitly define parentheses, the
grammar remains ambiguous and K's just-in-time parser will report an error.
However, you are now able to parse more complex programs by means of explicitly
grouping subterms with the bracket we have just defined.

Consider `and-or-left.bool`:

```
(true && false) || false
```

Now consider `and-or-right.bool`:

```
true && (false || false)
```

> If you parse these programs with `kast`, you will once again get a single
> unique AST with no error. If you look, you may spot that the bracket itself
> does not appear in the AST. In fact, this is a property unique to brackets:
> productions with the bracket attribute are not represented in the parsed AST
> of a term, and the child of the bracket is folded immediately into the parent
> term. This is the reason for the requirement that a bracket production have
> a single non-terminal of the same sort as the production itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you parse these programs with `kast`, you will once again get a single
unique AST with no error. If you look, you will notice that the bracket itself
does not appear in the AST. In fact, this is a property unique to brackets:
productions with the bracket attribute are not represented in the parsed AST
of a term, and the child of the bracket is folded immediately into the parent
term. This is the reason for the requirement that a bracket production have
a single non-terminal of the same sort as the production itself.
```

## Priority blocks

> Of course, in practice, very few formal languages outside the domain of
> natural language processing are ambiguous. The main reason for this is that
> parsing unambiguous languages is asymptotically faster than parsing ambiguous
> languages. Programming language designers instead prefer to use a notion of
> operator precedence and associativity to make expression grammars unambiguous
> by automatically choosing certain parses over other parses in cases where the
> grammar would otherwise be ambiguous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, in practice, very few formal languages outside the domain of
natural language processing are ambiguous. The main reason for this is that
parsing unambiguous languages is asymptotically faster than parsing ambiguous
languages. Programming language designers use the notions of
operator precedence and associativity to make expression grammars unambiguous.
These tools work by instructing the parser which ASTs to select in the case of ambiguities; often times it's possible to remove _all_ the ambiguities in a grammar with these techniques.
```

> While it is sometimes possible to explicitly rewrite the grammar to remove
> these parses, because K's grammar specification and AST generation are
> inextricably linked, this is generally discouraged. Instead, we use the
> approach of explicitly expressing the relative precedence of different
> operators in different situations in order to resolve the ambiguity.
> 

Reviewer: This block has the tone of "contradicting" the previous block of text, even though it agrees with it. Doesn't seem to add much either, so I would just remove it.

```suggestion
```

Author: This paragraph actually does serve an important role. It explains to anyone who is previously familiar with other parser generators an important way in which parser generation in K is usually done differently than they might be used to.

> For example, in C, `&&` binds tighter in precedence than `||`, meaning that
> the expression `true && false || false` would be parsed as
> `(true && false) || false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in C, `&&` binds tighter in precedence than `||`, meaning that
the expression `true && false || false` has only one valid parse:
`(true && false) || false`.
```

(`lesson-03-e.k`):

```k
module LESSON-03-E

  syntax Boolean ::= "true" | "false"
                   | "(" Boolean ")" [bracket]
                   > "!" Boolean [function]
                   > Boolean "&&" Boolean [function]
                   > Boolean "^" Boolean [function]
                   > Boolean "||" Boolean [function]

endmodule
```

In this example, some of the `|` symbols separating productions in a single
block have been replaced with `>`. This serves to describe the
**priority groups** associated with this block of productions.

In this example, the first priority group consists of the atoms of the
language: `true`, `false`, and the bracket operator. In general, a priority
group starts either at the `::=` or `>` operator and extends until either the
next `>` operator or the end of the production block. Thus, we can see that the
second, third, fourth, and fifth priority groups in this grammar all consist
of a single production.

The meaning of these priority groups becomes apparent when parsing programs:
A symbol with a **lesser priority**, (i.e., one that **binds looser**), cannot
appear as the **direct child** of a symbol with a **greater priority** (i.e.,

> one that **binds tighter**. In this case, the `>` operator can be seen as a
> **less-than** operator describing a transitive partial ordering on the 
> productions in the production block, expressing their relative priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one that **binds tighter**. In this case, the `>` operator can be seen as a
**greater-than** operator describing a transitive partial ordering on the 
productions in the production block, expressing their relative priority.
```

> To see this more concretely, let's look again at the program
> `true && false || false`. As noted before, previously this program was
> ambiguous because it was ambiguous whether the `&&` was a child of the `||`
> or vice versa. However, because of the rule that a symbol with lesser priority
> cannot appear as the direct child of a symbol with greater priority, and
> because we can see from the above grammar that `&&` has a greater priority than
> `||`, we **reject** the parse where `||` is under the `&&` operator. As a
> result, we are left with the unambiguous parse `(true && false) || false`.
> Similarly, `true || false && false` parses unambiguously as
> `true || (false && false)`. Conversely, if the user explicitly wants the other
> parse, they can express this parse using brackets. In other words, they can
> explicitly write the program `true && (false || false)`. This still parses
> successfully because the `||` operator is no longer the **direct** child of the
> `&&` operator, but is instead the direct child of the `()` operator, and the
> `&&` operator is an **indirect** parent. Indirect parents are completely
> ignored when disambiguating; only the direct parent/child relation matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see this more concretely, let's look again at the program
`true && false || false`. As noted before, previously this program was
ambiguous because the parser could either choose the `&&` to be a child of the `||`
or vice versa. However, because a symbol with lesser priority (in this case `||`)
cannot appear as the direct child of a symbol with greater priority (in this case `&&`),
the parser can now **reject** the parse where `||` is under the `&&` operator. As a
result, we are left with the unambiguous parse `(true && false) || false`.
Similarly, `true || false && false` parses unambiguously as
`true || (false && false)`. Conversely, if the user explicitly wants the other
parse, they can express this using brackets by explicitly writing `true && (false || false)`. This still parses
successfully because the `||` operator is no longer the **direct** child of the
`&&` operator, but is instead the direct child of the `()` operator, and the
`&&` operator is an **indirect** parent.
```

Astute readers, however, will already have noticed what seems to be a
contradiction: we have defined `()` as also having greater priority than `||`.
One would think that this should mean that `||` cannot appear as a direct
child of `()`. This is a problem because priority groups are applied to every
possible parse separately. That is to say, even if the term is unambiguous
prior to this disambiguation rule, we still reject that parse if it violates
the rule of priority.

In fact, however, we do not reject this program as a parse error. Why is that?
Well, the rule for priority is slightly more complex than previously described.
In actual fact, it applies only conditionally. Specifically, it applies in
cases where the child is either the first or last production item in the
parent's production. For example, in the production `Bool "&&" Bool`, the
first `Bool` non-terminal is not preceded by any terminals, and the last `Bool`
non-terminal is not followed by any terminals. As a result of this, we apply
the priority rule to both children of `&&`. However, in the `()` operator, 

> the sole non-terminal is both preceded by and followed by a terminal. As a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the sole non-terminal is both preceded by and followed by terminals (`"("` and `")"`, respectively). As a
```

result, the priority rule is not applied when `()` is the parent. Because of
this, the program we mentioned above successfully parses.

## Associativity

Even having broken the expression grammar into priority blocks, the resulting
grammar is still ambiguous. We can see this if we try to parse the following
program (`assoc.bool`):

```
true && false && false
```

> Priority blocks will not help us here: the problem comes between two parses
> where both possible parses have a direct parent and child which is within a
> single priority block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Priority blocks will not help us here: the problem comes between two parses
where both possible parses have a direct parent and child which is within a
single priority block (in this case, the `&&` is in the same priority block as itself).
```

> This is where the notion of associativity comes into play. Essentially,
> associativity applies the following additional rule to parses: a
> left-associative symbol cannot appear as a direct rightmost child of a symbol
> with equal priority; a right-associative symbol cannot appear as a direct
> leftmost child of a symbol with equal priority; and a non-associative symbol
> cannot appear as a direct leftmost **or** rightmost child of a symbol with
> equal priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the notion of associativity comes into play. Associativity applies the following additional rule to parses:

-   a left-associative symbol cannot appear as a direct rightmost child of a symbol
with equal priority,
-   a right-associative symbol cannot appear as a direct leftmost child of a symbol with equal priority, and
-   a non-associative symbol cannot appear as a direct leftmost **or** rightmost child of a symbol with equal priority.
```

be followed by a symbol representing the associativity of that priority group:
either `left:` for left associativity, `right:` for right associativity, or
`non-assoc:` for non-associativity. In this example, each priority group we
apply associativity to has only a single production, but we could equally well
write a priority block with multiple productions and an associativity.

For example, consider the following, different grammar (`lesson-03-g.k`):

```k
module LESSON-03-G

  syntax Boolean ::= "true" | "false"
                   | "(" Boolean ")" [bracket]
                   > "!" Boolean [function]
                   > left: 
                     Boolean "&&" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "^" Boolean [function]
                   | Boolean "||" Boolean [function]

endmodule
```

In this example, unlike the one above, `&&`, `^`, and `||` have the same
priority. However, viewed as a group, the entire group is left associative.
This means that none of `&&`, `^`, and `||` can appear as the right child of
any of `&&`, `^`, or `||`. As a result of this, this grammar is also not
ambiguous. However, it expresses a different grammar, and you are encouraged

> to think about what the differences are in practice.

Reviewer: Please provide some example programs here that users can call `kast` on and see the difference, rather than just saying "think about it".

## Explicit priority and associativity declarations

Previously we have only considered the case where all of the productions
which you wish to express a priority or associativity relation over are
co-located in the same block of productions. However, in practice this is not
always feasible or desirable, especially as a definition grows in size across
multiple modules.

As a result of this, K provides a second way of declaring priority and
associativity relations.

> Consider the following grammar, which we will name `lesson-03-h.k` and which
> will express the exact same grammar relation as `lesson-03-f.k`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following grammar, which we will name `lesson-03-h.k` and which
will express the exact same grammar as `lesson-03-f.k`
```

`literal` attribute, i.e., `true` and `false`.

Once we understand this, it becomes relatively straightforward to understand
the meaning of this grammar. Each `syntax priorities` sentence defines a
priority relation where each `>` separates a priority group containing all
the productions with at least one of the attributes in that group, and each
`syntax left`, `syntax right`, or `syntax non-assoc` sentence defines an
associativity relation connecting all the productions with one of the target
attributes together into a left-, right-, or non-associative grouping.

## Prefer/avoid

Sometimes priority and associativity proves insufficient to disambiguate a
grammar. In particular, sometimes it is desirable to be able to choose between
two ambiguous parses directly while still not rejecting any parses if the term
parsed is unambiguous. A good example of this is the famous "dangling else"
problem in imperative C-like languages.

Consider the following definition (`lesson-03-i.k`):

```k
module LESSON-03-I

  syntax Exp ::= "true" | "false"
  syntax Stmt ::= "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt
                | "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt "else" Stmt

>                 | ";"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                | "{" "}"
```

The empty block `{ }` may read better in the examples below.

priorities, saying that the `if` without an `else` cannot appear as a child of
the `if` with an `else`. However, because the non-terminal in the parent symbol
is both preceded and followed by a terminal, this will not work.

Instead, we can resolve the ambiguity directly by telling the parser to
"prefer" or "avoid" certain productions when ambiguities arise. For example,
when we parse this program, we see the following ambiguity as an error message:

```
[Error] Inner Parser: Parsing ambiguity.
1: syntax Stmt ::= "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt

`if(_)__LESSON-03-I_Stmt_Exp_Stmt`(`true_LESSON-03-I_Exp`(.KList),`if(_)_else__LESSON-03-I_Stmt_Exp_Stmt_Stmt`(`false_LESSON-03-I_Exp`(.KList),`;_LESSON-03-I_Stmt`(.KList),`;_LESSON-03-I_Stmt`(.KList)))
2: syntax Stmt ::= "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt "else" Stmt

`if(_)_else__LESSON-03-I_Stmt_Exp_Stmt_Stmt`(`true_LESSON-03-I_Exp`(.KList),`if(_)__LESSON-03-I_Stmt_Exp_Stmt`(`false_LESSON-03-I_Exp`(.KList),`;_LESSON-03-I_Stmt`(.KList)),`;_LESSON-03-I_Stmt`(.KList))
        Source(./dangling-else.if)
        Location(1,1,1,30)
```

Roughly, we see that the ambiguity is between an `if` with an `else` or an `if`

> without an `else`. Siknce we want to pick the first parse, we can tell K to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without an `else`. Since we want to pick the first parse, we can tell K to
```

"avoid" the second parse with the `avoid` attribute. Consider the following
modified definition (`lesson-03-j.k`):

```k
module LESSON-03-I

  syntax Exp ::= "true" | "false"
  syntax Stmt ::= "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt
                | "if" "(" Exp ")" Stmt "else" Stmt [avoid]
                | ";"
endmodule
```

> Here we have added the `avoid` attribute to the `else` production. As a result,
> when an ambiguity occurs and one or more of the possible parses has that symbol
> at the top of the ambiguous part of the parse, we remove those parses from
> consideration and consider only those remaining. The `prefer` attribute behaves
> similarly, but instead removes all parses which do not have that attribute.
> In both cases, no action is taken if the parse is not ambiguous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we have added the `avoid` attribute to the `else` production. Now,
when an ambiguity occurs, any of the possible parses which has the `avoid` symbol
at the top will be removed from consideration. The `prefer` attribute behaves
similarly, but instead removes all parses which do not have a `prefer` symbol at the top.
In both cases, no action is taken if the parse is not ambiguous.
```

Author: It is actually a clearer explanation the way I originally left it. Your wording doesn't adequately explain that what matters is where the ambiguous part of the parse begins.

is the lexical syntax of the language. Thus far, we have implicitly been using
K's automatic lexer generation to generate a token in the scanner for each
terminal in our grammar. However, sometimes we wish to define more complex
lexical syntax. For example, consider the case of integers in C: an integer
consists of a decimal, octal, or hexadecimal number followed by an optional
suffix indicating the type of the literal.

In theory it would be possible to define this syntax via a grammar, but not
only would it be cumbersome and tedious, you would also then have to deal with
an AST generated for the literal which is not convenient to work with.

Instead of doing this, K allows you to define **token** productions, where
a production consists of a regular expression followed by the `token`
attribute, and the resulting AST consists of a typed string containing the
value recognized by the regular expression.

For example, we might define the integer token in C with the following
production:

```k
syntax IntConstant ::= r"(([1-9][0-9]*)|(0[0-7]*)|(0[xX][0-9a-fA-F]+))(([uU][lL]?)|([uU]((ll)|(LL)))|([lL][uU]?)|(((ll)|(LL))[uU]?))?" [token]

> ```

Reviewer: This is much too overwhelming of an example to start with. Let's begin with just something like `[1-9][0-9]*` or the like, and then show them this one.

As you can see, the main difference with this production is the `r` preceding
the terminal and the `token` attribute. The `r` indicates that what follows
is a regular expression. It is also possible to define tokens that do not
use regular expressions. This can be useful when you wish to declare particular
identifiers for use in your semantics later. For example:

```k
syntax Id ::= "main" [token]
```

> Here we declare that `main` is a token of sort `Id`. Instead of being parsed
> as a symbol, it gets parsed as a token instead, generating a typed string
> in the AST. This is useful because the parser generally does not treat the
> `main` function in C specially; only the semantics treats it specially.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we declare that `main` is a token of sort `Id`. Instead of being parsed
as a symbol, it gets parsed as a token, generating a typed string
in the AST. This is useful because the parser generally does not treat the
`main` function in C specially; only the semantics treats it specially.
```

```

As you can see, this is rather more verbose, but it has the benefit of both
being much easier to read and understand, and also increased modularity.
Note that we refer to a named regular expression by putting the name in curly
brackets. Note also that only the first sentence actually declares a new piece
of syntax in the language. When the user writes `syntax lexical`, they are only
declaring a regular expression. To declare an actual piece of syntax in the
grammar, you still must actually declare an explicit token production.

One final note: K uses [Flex](https://github.com/westes/flex) to implement
its lexical analysis. As a result, you can refer to the
[Flex Manual](http://westes.github.io/flex/manual/Patterns.html#Patterns)
for a detailed description of the regular expression syntax supported. Note
that for performance reasons, Flex's regular expressions are actually a regular
language, and thus lack some of the syntactic convenience of modern
"regular expression" libraries. If you need features that are not part of the
syntax of Flex regular expressions, you are encouraged to express them via
a grammar instead.

## Ahead-of-time parser generation

> Finally, so far we have been entirely focused on K's support for just-in-time
> parsing, where the parser is generated on the fly prior to being used.
> This benefits from being faster to generate the parser, but it suffers in
> performance if you have to repeatedly parse strings with the same parser.
> For this reason, it is generally encouraged that when parsing programs,
> you use K's ahead-of-time parser generation instead. K makes use of
> [GNU Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/) to generate parsers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we have been entirely focused on K's support for just-in-time
parsing, where the parser is generated on the fly prior to being used.
This benefits from being faster to generate the parser, but it suffers in
performance if you have to repeatedly parse strings with the same parser.
For this reason, it is generally encouraged that when parsing programs,
you use K's ahead-of-time parser generation. K makes use of
[GNU Bison](https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/) to generate parsers.
```
